---
title: "Speaker Series: Charlotte Boesch from the Billion Oyster Project"
date: February 22, 2021
---

[Recording](https://nyu.zoom.us/rec/play/5wHjqkGjwGH50fSzgYx5dOfvveXM6951LkxC-7QwqwiYujL7Fn7xoV-SpIYydMA9EEXhkcmp9_mpZUaM.57-eNYRLiqbP55H-?startTime=1614038724000)

[Billion Oyster Project](https://www.billionoysterproject.org/) offers public school students, volunteers, community scientists and restaurants the opportunity to learn about New York City’s rich oyster history and lead the movement to restore it. Since 2015, Billion Oyster Project has operated a Shell Collection Program, which gives restaurants an opportunity to not only divert shells from landfills, but also to reclaim this valuable resource for the restoration of oyster reefs. In the next 5 years, we hope to use those shells to help us restore 100 million oysters to New York Harbor. Plus, we are currently piloting oyster setting processes that will allow us to scale to 25 million oysters per field season by 2024.

**Charlotte Boesch** graduated in 2018 with an MA in Food Studies from NYU Steinhardt. She is currently the Shell Collection Program Manager of the Billion Oyster Project, a nonprofit organization on a mission to restore oyster reefs to NY Harbor through public education initiatives. At Billion Oyster Project, Charlotte managers the day-to-day logistics and partnerships for the Shell Collection Program. Charlotte is passionate about creating a more sustainable and equitable food system, and excited to work at an organization that reuses restaurant waste to help restore New York Harbor. 