---
title: "Speaker Series: Meredith Danberg-Ficarelli & Jesi Taylor Cruz from Common Ground Compost "
date: December 4, 2020
---

[Zoom link](https://nyu.zoom.us/j/94504043541?pwd=bnA1aDNESEg5NURBM2x5bEhRVmhRUT09)

We are delighted to host **Common Ground Compost (CGC)** at our Speaker Series on Friday. Trash Club has worked on number of projects with CGC over the past few months, and we look forward to growing our collaboration in the future. A little bit more about them in their own words: 

We are a NYC business that helps divert food scraps from landfills: we are a zero waste consulting company, we run zero waste events (when not in a pandemic), and we collect food scraps by bicycle in Manhattan through our Reclaimed Organics program.

We advocate for expanded, equitable access to organics recycling for all New Yorkers, and we believe that organics should be treated as a valuable resource that can help reduce the cost of waste export, reduce the negative impact of waste infrastructure on overburdened communities, and educate all individuals about the steps they can take every day to improve the state of our planet for future generations.

**Meredith Danberg-Ficarelli** is the Director of Common Ground Compost LLC. She is Member At Large of the Manhattan Solid Waste Advisory Board, is a member of the Institute for Local Self Reliance’s Community Composting Coalition, is a board member of the US Composting Council, is a co-founding member of the NYC Microhaulers and Processors Trade Association, and was recognized by the New York State Association for Reuse, Reduction, and Recycling with the 2019 Recycling Leadership Award.

**Jesi Taylor Cruz** is the Waste Impact Administrator at Common Ground Compost. She is a doula, poet, herbalist, freelance journalist, and researcher whose primary areas of interest are Critical Race Theory, genocide studies, discard studies, environmental justice, and political theory.

**William Klimpert** is the Data and Systems Analyst at Common Ground Compost. As an avid nature enthusiast with a background in plant biophysics, he seeks to use data and technology to increase the accessibility of sustainability initiatives.